RFC: Online Bulk Load for RawKV (#72)
tikv/rfcs: text/0072-online-bulk-load-for-rawkv.md

# RFC: Online Bulk Load for RawKV

- RFC PR: https://github.com/tikv/rfcs/pull/72
- Tracking Issue: https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/10563
- [Proposal: TiKV Online Bulk Load (Chinese)](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1JggGwmOIMqinz_Q7QkIDHzwS--K_BgJopaxrB8Pzpaw/edit#)

## Summary

> Let RawKV support Online Bulk Load.

Reviewer: 1. this RFC only described the solution on the tikv side. Could you also supplement the whole solution based on the bulk load APIs? for example, how to provide a pluggable bulk load spark job that enables users to add custom transmission between source data to kv pairs?

2. could you describe how to test the ingesting speed and the performance impact on the online services? and how to verify that the ingested data is correct compared with the source data stored in files?

Author: sure

Author: https://github.com/marsishandsome/rfcs/blob/feature/bulk-load/text/0072-online-bulk-load-for-rawkv.md#how-to-measure-the-performance-impact-to-the-online-services

https://github.com/marsishandsome/rfcs/blob/feature/bulk-load/text/0072-online-bulk-load-for-rawkv.md#checksum

https://github.com/marsishandsome/rfcs/blob/feature/bulk-load/text/0072-online-bulk-load-for-rawkv.md#checksum

## Motivation

In the use use of `Feature Store`, every day machine learning jobs will train a
large amount of data which need to load to TiKV for online serving.

![Feature Store](../media/feature-store-tikv.png)

In order to satisfy this scenario, TiKV needs to provide `online bulk load`,
which should meet the following requirements:

1. the loading process should be as fast as possible,
2. the impact to the online serving (P99 latency) should be under control,

> 3. the loading framework should be able to process Big Data (500GB ~ 5TB).

Author: > does it mean that the loading framework should be able to process a large amount of data in a short period, let's say 1-3 hours?

yes

## Detailed design

The solution proposed in this RFC is as follows:

1. use distributed computing framework `Spark` to read the source files, convert
and encode the trained data into Key Value format,
2. sample the Key Value pairs, calculate the region split points, and call

> `split region and scatter` API

Author: https://github.com/marsishandsome/rfcs/blob/feature/bulk-load/text/0072-online-bulk-load-for-rawkv.md#why-split-region-and-scatter

> `split region and scatter` API

Author: https://github.com/marsishandsome/rfcs/blob/feature/bulk-load/text/0072-online-bulk-load-for-rawkv.md#why-split-region-and-scatter

3. repartition the Key Value pairs RDD according to the new Regions, sort inside each partition,

> use the [Import SST API](https://github.com/pingcap/kvproto/blob/release-5.0/proto/import_sstpb.proto#L34)

Author: done

to concurrently send the Key-Value pairs to the TiKV server and generate SST
files on the TiKV server,
4. use the [Ingest API](https://github.com/pingcap/kvproto/blob/release-5.0/proto/import_sstpb.proto#L53)
to ingest the generated SST files into TiKV.

![Bulk Load](../media/bulk-load.png)

### Proto

```
service ImportSST {
  rpc RawWrite(stream RawWriteRequest) returns (RawWriteResponse) {}
}

message RawWriteBatch {
    uint64 ttl = 1;
    repeated Pair pairs = 2;
}

message RawWriteRequest {
    oneof chunk {
        SSTMeta meta = 1;
        RawWriteBatch batch = 2;
    }
}

message RawWriteResponse {
    Error error = 1;
    repeated SSTMeta metas = 2;
}
```

> ### Rate Limit

Reviewer 2: Perhaps the rate limit is out of topic for this RFC because it's one of the features of the io rate limiter but not introduced by the online bulk load.

Author: Users should set the following configurations to produce a good trade-off between ingesting speed and impact on the online service

- config storage.io-rate-limit.max-bytes-per-sec
- config storage.io-rate-limit.import-priority = "low"

Reviewer: why is `storage.io-rate-limit` set to off by default? I thought it should default to `on` to mitigate the performance jitter since TiDB 5.0 :joy:

Author: Cause users should firstly get the value `max-bytes-per-sec` on their own hardware by running `fio`.

Author: It's better that TiKV it self can test and calculate the value `max-bytes-per-sec`.

We want to control the impact to the online serving (P99 latency) during the bulk load, so `Rate Limit` is an important component.

#### config import.num-threads

First of all, users can config the thread number of the import module, which is already implemented.

```
[import]
## Number of threads to handle RPC requests.
# num-threads = 8
```

#### config storage.io-rate-limit

[storage.io-rate-limit](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/tikv-configuration-file#storageio-rate-limit) limits the maximum I/O bytes that a server can write to or read from the disk.

Users can use `io-rate-limit` to limit Disk Write of the `import` module:

- config storage.io-rate-limit.max-bytes-per-sec
- config storage.io-rate-limit.import-priority = "low"

If the total disk write < max-bytes-per-sec, the `import` module will not be limited.
If the total disk write >= max-bytes-per-sec, the `import` module will be limited.

> ### Why Spark

Reviewer 2: May be better to describe the spark used in bulk load, e.g. how does it connect to TiKV cluster, whether it is a general component that could be reused for every user.

Author: sure

Author: https://github.com/marsishandsome/rfcs/blob/feature/bulk-load/text/0072-online-bulk-load-for-rawkv.md#pluggable-api

The loading framework should be able to process Big Data (500GB ~ 5TB), so we need to use a distributed calculation engine. Spark is chosen because:

1. Spark is widely used in major companies,
2. Spark is very good at doing this kind of job.

> ## Drawbacks

Reviewer: we can maintain a migration repository to store the spark jobs?

Author: yes, A new repository (tikv/migration) is needed to store the spark-related codes.
https://github.com/marsishandsome/rfcs/blob/feature/bulk-load/text/0072-online-bulk-load-for-rawkv.md#others

#### config import.num-threads

First of all, users can config the thread number of the import module, which is already implemented.

```
[import]
## Number of threads to handle RPC requests.
# num-threads = 8
```

#### config storage.io-rate-limit

[storage.io-rate-limit](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/tikv-configuration-file#storageio-rate-limit) limits the maximum I/O bytes that a server can write to or read from the disk.

Users can use `io-rate-limit` to limit Disk Write of the `import` module:

- config storage.io-rate-limit.max-bytes-per-sec
- config storage.io-rate-limit.import-priority = "low"

If the total disk write < max-bytes-per-sec, the `import` module will not be limited.
If the total disk write >= max-bytes-per-sec, the `import` module will be limited.

### Why Spark

The loading framework should be able to process Big Data (500GB ~ 5TB), so we need to use a distributed calculation engine. Spark is chosen because:

1. Spark is widely used in major companies,
2. Spark is very good at doing this kind of job.

## Drawbacks

Learning spark has a certain cost.

## Others

> A new repository (`tikv/migration`) is needed to store the spark-related codes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A new repository is required to hold the spark-related codes. I propose it be named `migration`
```

# RFC: Online Bulk Load for RawKV

- RFC PR: https://github.com/tikv/rfcs/pull/72
- Tracking Issue: https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/10563
- [Proposal: TiKV Online Bulk Load (Chinese)](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1JggGwmOIMqinz_Q7QkIDHzwS--K_BgJopaxrB8Pzpaw/edit#)

## Summary

Let RawKV support Online Bulk Load.

## Motivation

In the use use of `Feature Store`, everyday machine learning jobs will train a
large amount of data that needs to load to TiKV for online serving.

![Feature Store](../media/feature-store-tikv.png)

In order to satisfy this scenario, TiKV needs to provide `online bulk load`,
which should meet the following requirements:

1. the loading process should be as fast as possible,
2. the impact to the online serving (P99 latency) should be under control,
3. the loading speed can be improved in a linear way by adding more tikv instances,
4. the loading framework should be able to process Big Data (500GB ~ 5TB) in a short period (from minutes to several hours).

## Detailed design

The solution proposed in this RFC is as follows:

> 1. use distributed computing framework `Spark` to read the source files, convert
> and encode the trained data into Key Value format,
> 2. sample the Key Value pairs, calculate the region split points, and call `split region and scatter` API
> 3. repartition the Key-Value pairs RDD according to the new Regions boundaries, and sort the Key-Value pairs of each partition,
> use the [ImportSST.RawWrite](#proto) to concurrently send the Key-Value pairs to the TiKV server and generate SST files on the TiKV server,
> 4. use the [Ingest API](https://github.com/pingcap/kvproto/blob/release-5.0/proto/import_sstpb.proto#L53)
> to ingest the generated SST files into TiKV.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. read and convert the source file to key-value pairs, which can be done via [Apache Spark](https://spark.apache.org/).
2. calculate the region boundaries by sampling the generated key-value pairs, split and scatter new TiKV regions in advance to reduce bulk load time and avoid hotspot issues.
3. repartition and sort the key-value pairs in each RDD according to the boundaries of the new regions, send the sorted key-value pairs in each RDD to TiKV servers to generate SST files for each region via the [ImportSST.RawWrite](#proto) API.
4. ingest the generated SST files via the [ImportSST.MultiIngest](https://github.com/pingcap/kvproto/blob/release-5.0/proto/import_sstpb.proto#L53) API.
```

![Bulk Load](../media/bulk-load.png)

###  Why `split region and scatter`

There may be a situation that all the data to load belongs to one Region. In such case only one tikv-server instance will be used to process the bulk load requests. Before doing bulk load, we need to sample the Key Value pairs, calculate the region split points, and call `split region and scatter` API, so that most of the tikv-server instances can be used to process the bulk load requests.

### Proto

```
service ImportSST {
  rpc RawWrite(stream RawWriteRequest) returns (RawWriteResponse) {}
}

message RawWriteBatch {
    uint64 ttl = 1;
    repeated Pair pairs = 2;
}

message RawWriteRequest {
    oneof chunk {
        SSTMeta meta = 1;
        RawWriteBatch batch = 2;
    }
}

message RawWriteResponse {
    Error error = 1;
    repeated SSTMeta metas = 2;
}
```

### Rate Limit

We want to control the impact to the online serving (P99 latency) during the bulk load, so `Rate Limit` is an important component.

#### config import.num-threads

First of all, users can config the thread number of the import module, which is already implemented.

```
[import]
## Number of threads to handle RPC requests.

> # num-threads = 8

Reviewer: is this the recommended value?

Author: No. Recodemended value will be given on user documents after doing benchmark.

```

#### config storage.io-rate-limit

[storage.io-rate-limit](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/tikv-configuration-file#storageio-rate-limit) limits the maximum I/O bytes that a server can write to or read from the disk.

Users can use `io-rate-limit` to limit Disk Write of the `import` module:

> - config storage.io-rate-limit.max-bytes-per-sec

Reviewer: what's the recommended value for this config?

Author: The value is set according to specific hardware. 
Users can get the value by running `fio`.
The steps will be shown on user documents.

Reviewer 4: It seems that the writer use by lightning has share the global write limiter with RocksDB. This Limiter is acquired in `RocksDB::Env` and configure by `rocksdb.rate-bytes-per-sec`. You can try it

- config storage.io-rate-limit.import-priority = "low"

If the total disk write < max-bytes-per-sec, the `import` module will not be limited.
If the total disk write >= max-bytes-per-sec, the `import` module will be limited.

### How to measure the performance impact to the online services

One target of the bulk load proposal is that the impact to the online serving (P99 latency) should be under control. The performance impact to the online services can be mesasured as follows:

> 1. Run stress testing program to simulate the business logic, in which `Raw Get`, `Raw Put`, `Raw Batch Put`... will be called continuously.

Reviewer: is there any YCSB workload to satisify the requirement?

Author: Users can choose one from WorkloadA to WorkloadF according to their workload.
https://tikv.org/docs/5.1/deploy/performance/instructions/#step-3-run-a-ycsb-workload
If it does not satisfy, users can implement their own workload.

Reviewer: the main purpose of this section is to guide the performance test ourselves. we can directly use YCSB in this step.

Author: sure. I suggest to use `Workload B` (Read mostly workload), which is similar to  the `Feature Store Online Serving` case.

### Checksum

#### Check on server side using RawChecksum

[RawChecksum](https://github.com/pingcap/kvproto/blob/317f69fb54b44619271df82ec163764032184a85/proto/tikvpb.proto#L54) can be used if the following condition is satisfied:

- there is no old data in the key range to be loaded, or
- all the old data in the key range to be loaded is updated by the bulk load

#### Check on client side using BatchGet

If the `RawChecksum` condition is not satisfied, users can do checksum on client side as follows:

1. Calculate all the Key-Value pairs.
2. Using `BatchGet` to fetch the current values from TiKV.
3. Compare the Values from Step 1 and Step 2.

### Why Spark

The loading framework should be able to process Big Data (500GB ~ 5TB), so we need to use a distributed calculation engine. Spark is chosen because:

1. Spark is widely used in major companies,
2. Spark is very good at doing this kind of job.

### Pluggable API

Every company’s infrastructure is different. In order that users with different infrastructures can use the bulk load framework, we propose a pluggable API as follows.

![Pluggable API](../media/bulk-load-pluggable-api.png)

We provide 3 components:

> 1. Data Location & File Format: Spark itself covers almost all the cases. Users can also implement their own [Data Srouce Reader](https://spark.apache.org/docs/2.3.0/api/java/index.html?org/apache/spark/sql/sources/v2/DataSourceV2.html).
> 2. Encoder: encoder a Row to Key-Value pair. Users can implement the encoder by themself or choose from implemented ones. Users can implement their own encoder by implementing this function `(byte[], byte[]) encode(row: Row)`.
> 3. Ingest API: provide RawKV and TxnKV ingest API as default. Users do not need to implment there own version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Data Location & File Format: Spark itself covers almost all the cases. Users can also implement their own [Data Source Reader](https://spark.apache.org/docs/2.3.0/api/java/index.html?org/apache/spark/sql/sources/v2/DataSourceV2.html).
2. Encoder: encodes a Row to a Key-Value pair. Users can implement the encoder by themself or choose from implemented ones. Users can implement their own encoder by implementing this function `(byte[], byte[]) encode(row: Row)`.
3. Ingest API: provide RawKV and TxnKV ingest API as default. Users do not need to implement their own version.
```

Reviewer: for step 2, it's better to point to the location of the source code file. But since the migration repository is not ready, we can do it later.

Author: ok

5. Compare the results of Setp 2 and Step 4.

### Checksum

#### Check on server side using RawChecksum

[RawChecksum](https://github.com/pingcap/kvproto/blob/317f69fb54b44619271df82ec163764032184a85/proto/tikvpb.proto#L54) can be used if the following condition is satisfied:

- there is no old data in the key range to be loaded, or
- all the old data in the key range to be loaded is updated by the bulk load

#### Check on client side using BatchGet

If the `RawChecksum` condition is not satisfied, users can do checksum on client side as follows:

1. Calculate all the Key-Value pairs.
2. Using `BatchGet` to fetch the current values from TiKV.
3. Compare the Values from Step 1 and Step 2.

### Why Spark

The loading framework should be able to process Big Data (500GB ~ 5TB), so we need to use a distributed calculation engine. Spark is chosen because:

1. Spark is widely used in major companies,
2. Spark is very good at doing this kind of job.

### Pluggable API

Every company’s infrastructure is different, in order that users can use the bulk load framework, we propose a pluggable API as follows.

![Pluggable API](../media/bulk-load-pluggable-api.png)

> We provide 3 components:

Reviewer: could you elaborate more about:

- where to find these components
- what's the API need to implement for a custom implementation of each component

Author: sure

Author: > * what's the API need to implement for a custom implementation of each component

https://github.com/marsishandsome/rfcs/blob/feature/bulk-load/text/0072-online-bulk-load-for-rawkv.md#pluggable-api

We provide 3 components:

1. Data Location & File Format: Spark itself covers almost all the cases. Users can also implement their own [Data Srouce Reader](https://spark.apache.org/docs/2.3.0/api/java/index.html?org/apache/spark/sql/sources/v2/DataSourceV2.html).
2. Encoder: encoder a Row to Key-Value pair. Users can use the implemented the encoder by themself or choose from implemented ones. Users can implement their own encoder by implementing this function `(byte[], byte[]) encode(row: Row)`.
3. Ingest API: provide RawKV and TxnKV ingest API as default. Users do not need to implment there own version.
